ReadMe.md, before:

# Parables

# New wine into old wineskins

### [Luke 5:37-39](https://www.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Luke+5%3A37-39&version=ESV)

### Context

- Jesus is attending a dinner at Levi's house with tax collectors
- He has already told them he has not come for the healthy but for sinners
- He was asked why His disciples don't fast while John's did
- He replied that you do not fast while the bridegroom is present, but that the time will come when the bridegroom is taken from them. Then they will fast.

### Meaning 1

- Jesus was bringing a new covenant that did not fit with the old rituals and customs of the Pharisees
- Jesus message cut to the heart of the hearer while the Pharisees' customs only dealt with the external
- Preference of old vs. instead of new refers to an adjustment period between for followers of the old ways (e.g. John and his disciples) who will grow into the new ways
- http://www.jesuswalk.com/lessons/5_33-39.htm
- https://hermeneutics.stackexchange.com/questions/7659/what-does-jesus-mean-in-luke-536-39-new-wine-into-old-wineskins

### Meaning 2

- Old garment and wineskins = Jesus' disciples
- New wine and unshrunk cloth represent the practice of fasting twice a week
- Fasting this way would be burdensome to the new disciples, and would be more than they could bear.
- John Calvin: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/New_Wine_into_Old_Wineskins

## A tree and its fruit

- Luke 6:43-45

## Wise and foolish builders

- Luke 6:46-49

## The two debtors

- Luke 7:41-43

## The sower

- Luke 8:5-8

## Purpose of the parables

- Luke 8:9-15

## Lamp under a jar

- Luke 8:16-18

## The good Samaritan

- Luke 10:25-37

## The friend at night

- Luke 11:5-8

## The strong man

- Luke 11:21-22

## The rich fool

- Luke 12:13-21

## The faithful servant

- Luke 12:35-48

## The barren fig tree

- Luke 13:6-9

## The mustard seed

- Luke 13:18-19

## The leaven

- Luke 13:20

## The wedding feast

- Luke 14:7-11

## The great banquet

- Luke 14:12-24

## The salt

- Luke 14:34-35

## Lost sheep

- Luke 15:1-7

## Lost coin

- Luke 15:8-10

## Prodigal son

- Luke 15:11-32

## Dishonest manager

- Luke 16:1-13

## Rich man and Lazarus

- Luke 16:19-31

## Unworthy servant

- Luke 17:7-10

## Persistent widow

- Luke 18:1-8

## Pharisee and the tax collector

- Luke 18:9-14

## Ten minas

- Luke 19:11-27

## Wicked tenants

- Luke 20:9-18

## Budding fig tree

- Luke 21:29-33

Commit message:

Added notes for 'A tree and its fruit'

ReadMe.md, after:

# Parables

## New wine into old wineskins

<details><summary>Luke 5:37-39</summary><p>37 And no one puts new wine into old wineskins. If he does, the new wine will burst the skins and it will be spilled, and the skins will be destroyed.38 But new wine must be put into fresh wineskins. 39 And no one after drinking old wine desires new, for he says, ‘The old is good.’” <a href="https://www.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Luke+5%3A37-39&version=ESV">(ESV)</a></p></details>

### Context

- Jesus is attending a dinner at Levi's house with tax collectors
- He has already told them he has not come for the healthy but for sinners
- He was asked why His disciples don't fast while John's did
- He replied that you do not fast while the bridegroom is present, but that the time will come when the bridegroom is taken from them. Then they will fast.

### Interpretation 1

- Jesus was bringing a new covenant that did not fit with the old rituals and customs of the Pharisees
- Jesus message cut to the heart of the hearer while the Pharisees' customs only dealt with the external
- Preference of old vs. instead of new refers to an adjustment period between for followers of the old ways (e.g. John and his disciples) who will grow into the new ways
- http://www.jesuswalk.com/lessons/5_33-39.htm
- https://hermeneutics.stackexchange.com/questions/7659/what-does-jesus-mean-in-luke-536-39-new-wine-into-old-wineskins

### Interpretation 2

- Old garment and wineskins = Jesus' disciples
- New wine and unshrunk cloth represent the practice of fasting twice a week
- Fasting this way would be burdensome to the new disciples, and would be more than they could bear.
- John Calvin: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/New_Wine_into_Old_Wineskins

## A tree and its fruit

<details><summary>Luke 6:43-45</summary><p>43 “For no good tree bears bad fruit, nor again does a bad tree bear good fruit, 44 for each tree is known by its own fruit. For figs are not gathered from thornbushes, nor are grapes picked from a bramble bush. 45 The good person out of the good treasure of his heart produces good, and the evil person out of his evil treasure produces evil, for out of the abundance of the heart his mouth speaks." <a href="https://www.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Luke+6:43-45&version=ESV">(ESV)</a></p></details>

### Context

- Jesus is finishing the "Sermon on the Plain" where he is preaching to his disciples and a crowd that had gathered
- Immediately before this parable, Jesus criticizes hypocrites for seeing the speck in their brother's eye but not the log in their own eyes.
- Immediately following this parable, Jesus asks "Why do you call me 'Lord, Lord,' and not do what I tell you?" and compares those who hear His words but does not do them to a man who builds a house on the ground without a foundation.

### Interpretation

- What we say, how we say it, and when we say it reveals the condition of our heart.
- This passage says that it's a person's *words*, that indicates the condition of their heart. This passage is not talking about actions, but words.
- We should reflect on our words as a way to gauge our own hearts. This passage is not a license to judge others based on their words (see Context above), but focus on our own words.
- Great read: https://redeeminggod.com/sermons/luke/luke_6_43-45/

## Wise and foolish builders

- Luke 6:46-49

## The two debtors

- Luke 7:41-43

## The sower

- Luke 8:5-8

## Purpose of the parables

- Luke 8:9-15

## Lamp under a jar

- Luke 8:16-18

## The good Samaritan

- Luke 10:25-37

## The friend at night

- Luke 11:5-8

## The strong man

- Luke 11:21-22

## The rich fool

- Luke 12:13-21

## The faithful servant

- Luke 12:35-48

## The barren fig tree

- Luke 13:6-9

## The mustard seed

- Luke 13:18-19

## The leaven

- Luke 13:20

## The wedding feast

- Luke 14:7-11

## The great banquet

- Luke 14:12-24

## The salt

- Luke 14:34-35

## Lost sheep

- Luke 15:1-7

## Lost coin

- Luke 15:8-10

## Prodigal son

- Luke 15:11-32

## Dishonest manager

- Luke 16:1-13

## Rich man and Lazarus

- Luke 16:19-31

## Unworthy servant

- Luke 17:7-10

## Persistent widow

- Luke 18:1-8

## Pharisee and the tax collector

- Luke 18:9-14

## Ten minas

- Luke 19:11-27

## Wicked tenants

- Luke 20:9-18

## Budding fig tree

- Luke 21:29-33
